Blog post for the storage write removal before conditional termination bug. (#191)
ethereum/solidity-blog: _posts/2022-09-08-storage-write-removal-before-conditional-termination.md

---
layout: post
published: true
title: 'Optimizer Bug Causing the Removal of Storage Writes Before Calls to Functions Conditionally Terminating the Transaction'
date: '2022-09-08'
author: Solidity Team
category: Security Alerts
---
On September 5, 2022, a bug in Solidity's Yul optimizer was found by differential fuzzing.

> The bug was introduced in version 0.8.13 and [Solidity version 0.8.17](https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/releases/tag/v0.8.17), released on September 07, 2022, provides a fix. The bug is significantly easier to trigger with optimized via-IR code generation, but can theoretically also occur in optimized legacy code generation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The bug was introduced in version 0.8.13 and [Solidity version 0.8.17](https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/releases/tag/v0.8.17), released on September 08, 2022, provides a fix. The bug is significantly easier to trigger with optimized via-IR code generation, but can theoretically also occur in optimized legacy code generation.
```

We assigned the bug a severity of "medium/high".

## Who Should Be Concerned

If you're using optimized legacy code generation, you only need to be concerned, if you use large inline assembly blocks that involve user-defined assembly functions that involve the ``return(...)`` or ``stop()`` instructions. Furthermore only inline assembly blocks that do not interact with any surrounding Solidity variables can be affected.

> If you're using optimized via-IR code generation, you are more likely to be affected:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you're using optimized via-IR code generation, you are more likely to be affected.
```

> You should carefully check your contract whenever it involves any code path that can write to storage and that can then either continue to an early termination using assembly ``return(...)`` or ``stop()``, or can bypass this early termination. This includes cases in which the storage writes or the early termination occur in complex control flow or in arbitrarily nested function calls.

Reviewer: This sounded a bit ambiguous to me regarding whether you need both at the same time or just one of them. How about this?
```suggestion
You should carefully check your contract whenever it involves any code path that first writes to storage and then continues to an early termination using assembly ``return(...)`` or ``stop()``, but can also conditionally bypass this early termination. This includes cases in which the storage writes or the early termination occur in complex control flow or in arbitrarily nested function calls.
```

The following is a minimal example that will exhibit the bug if compiled via IR with enabled optimizer:

```solidity
contract C {
	uint public x;
	function f(bool a) public {
		x = 1; // This write used to be incorrectly removed by the Yul optimizer due to the bug.  
		g(a);
		x = 2;
	}
	function g(bool a) internal {
		// The relevant part of this function is that it can both return to the caller and terminate the transaction.
		// The bug will show its effects in the cases in which the transaction is terminated (i.e. if a is false).
		// In this case the write x = 1 above will be missing.
		if (a) return;
		assembly { return(0,0) }
	}
}
```

> Compiling the above via IR with enabled optimizer will result in ``f(false)`` to incorrectly terminate the transaction without modifying ``x``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Compiling the above via IR with enabled optimizer will result in ``f(false)`` incorrectly terminating the transaction without modifying ``x``.
```

> For a concrete contract, the bug may still be prevented, in case the optimizer inlines the function before running the problematic optimizer step, e.g. the following contract is almost identical, but unaffected, since ``g()`` will be inlined (in the snippet above the Solidity-level ``return;`` prevents easy inlining):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For a concrete contract, the bug may still be avoided if the optimizer inlines the function before running the problematic optimizer step, e.g. the following contract is almost identical, but unaffected, since ``g()`` will be inlined (in the snippet above the Solidity-level ``return;`` prevents easy inlining):
```

Author: To me "avoiding" sounds more like something somebody does actively... whereas "being prevented" is something that just happens... but also fine with changing...

Reviewer: Haha, I had the exact opposite impression. I.e. you actively prevent something but in this case it's not under your control so you may just passively avoid it.

In any case, not very important. Just sounded better to me that way.

Author: Yeah, you have a point there - can be read that way as well :-). The real problem is probably phrasing it as passive... let me rephrase it after all - if I say ``the optimizer may still prevent the bug if it inlines``, it's clear. I still prefer ``prevent`` there, not ``avoid`` for some reason, but fine either way :-D.

```solidity
contract C {
	uint public x;
	function f(bool a) public {
		x = 1;
		g(a);
		x = 2;
	}
	function g(bool a) internal {
		if (!a)
			assembly { return(0,0) }
	}
}
```

To check whether your contract is actually affected, you need to trigger the condition leading to the assembly ``return(...)`` or ``stop()`` and verify that all storage writes that should have happened in the code leading to it were correctly performed.

## Technical Details

> The Yul optimizer step responsible for the bug is the Unused Store Eliminator (abbreviated as `S` in the optimizer step sequence). It is meant to remove storage writes that it can determine to be redundant. A storage write is considered redundant in either of the following two cases:

Reviewer: I wanted to suggest a link but looks like this step is actually not documented :) It's not listed in https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/latest/internals/optimizer.html#optimizer-steps or https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/latest/yul.html#optimization-step-sequence.

Reviewer: https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/issues/13497

> The Yul optimizer step responsible for the bug is the Unused Store Eliminator (abbreviated as `S` in the optimizer step sequence). It is meant to remove storage writes that it can determine to be redundant. A storage write is considered redundant in either of the following two cases:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Yul optimizer step responsible for the bug is the Unused Store Eliminator (abbreviated as `S` in the [optimizer step sequence](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/latest/yul.html#optimization-step-sequence)). It is meant to remove storage writes that it can determine to be redundant. A storage write is considered redundant in either of the following two cases:
```

So on the Yul level the issue manifests if the following sequence occurs within a Yul block during optimization:

1. A storage write occurs (e.g. ``sstore(0, 1)``, but the write may also occur within complex control flow like a single ``switch`` case).
2. A user-defined function is called and this function both has a control flow path that terminates the transaction and a control flow path out of the function.
3. Any continuing control flow path does either of the following:
    - It overwrites the storage slot written in (1), s.t. the storage write in (1) becomes redundant for this path (e.g. ``sstore(0, 2)``).
    - The control flow unconditionally reverts (e.g. ``revert(0, 0)``)

In this situation, the optimizer will treat the storage write in (1) as redundant and remove it, despite the fact that the called Yul function may successfully terminate the EVM call, in which case this storage write is in fact not redundant at all.

The following is a full example of an affected Yul snippet:

```yul
{
	function f() {
		if gt(calldatasize(), 4) { leave }
		return(0, 0)
	}
	sstore(0, 1) // This sstore will incorrectly be removed.
	f()
	sstore(0, 2)
}
```

> In the absence of the bug, the first ``sstore`` would have been be marked as required by the optimizer upon encountering the call to ``f()``, i.e. it should not be considered for removal regardless of what happens afterwards, since the control flow path of ``f()`` reaching the ``return(0, 0)`` already relies on the ``sstore`` happening.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the absence of the bug, the first ``sstore`` would have been marked as required by the optimizer upon encountering the call to ``f()``, i.e. it should not be considered for removal regardless of what happens afterwards, since the control flow path of ``f()`` reaching the ``return(0, 0)`` already relies on the ``sstore`` happening.
```

However, the optimizer failed to mark it as such, marking the first ``sstore`` as redundant instead once it sees the second ``sstore`` overwriting the slot.

The issue only occurs in the presence of a call to a conditionally successfully terminating Yul function that does not end up being inlined by the preceding optimizer steps.
The following very similarly looking snippet is not affected, since the optimizer will inline the call to ``f()`` before performing
the buggy optimization step:

```yul
{
	function f() {
		if iszero(lt(calldatasize(), 4)) { return(0,0) }
	}
	sstore(0, 1)
	f()
	sstore(0, 2)
}
```

In this case, ``f()`` will be inlined, resulting in

```yul
{
	sstore(0, 1)

> 	if calldataload(4) { return(0,0) }

Reviewer: Is this really an optimized version of `if iszero(lt(calldatasize(), 4)) { return(0,0) }`?

Author: Of course it is :-P. (fixing...)

		// The bug will show its effects in the cases in which
		// the transaction is terminated (i.e. if a is false).
		// In this case the write x = 1 above will be missing.
		if (a) return;
		assembly { return(0,0) }
	}
}
```

Compiling the above via IR with enabled optimizer will result in ``f(false)`` incorrectly terminating the transaction without modifying ``x``.

For a concrete contract, the bug may still be prevented, in case the optimizer inlines the function before running the problematic optimizer step, e.g. the following contract is almost identical, but unaffected, since ``g()`` will be inlined (in the snippet above the Solidity-level ``return;`` prevents easy inlining):

```solidity
contract C {
	uint public x;
	function f(bool a) public {
		x = 1;
		g(a);
		x = 2;
	}
	function g(bool a) internal {
		if (!a)
			assembly { return(0,0) }
	}
}
```

To check whether your contract is actually affected, you need to trigger the condition leading to the assembly ``return(...)`` or ``stop()`` and verify that all storage writes that should have happened in the code leading to it were correctly performed.

## Technical Details

> The Yul optimizer step responsible for the bug is the Unused Store Eliminator (abbreviated as `S` in the [optimizer step sequence](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/latest/yul.html#optimization-step-sequence)). It is meant to remove storage writes that it can determine to be redundant. A storage write is considered redundant in either of the following two cases:

Author: Yeah... see https://github.com/ethereum/solidity-blog/pull/191#discussion_r965182259, resp. https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/issues/13497 :-).

- In all code paths after the initial write, a subsequent write overwrites the written value.

> - The transaction unconditionally reverts after the write.

Reviewer: Ambiguous. There are two writes mentioned in the previous point :)
```suggestion
- The transaction unconditionally reverts after the initial write.
```

So similarly to above, the general pattern is:
1. a storage write (potentially within complex control flow), then
2. potentially unrelated code, and finally 
3. any continuing control flow path either overwrites the storage write in (1) with a different value or reverts.

The bug is due to the treatment of certain function calls in (2).

> If a function call is performed between (1) and (3), the optimizer has to consider the control flow behaviour of the function call, e.g. whether control flow may continue beyond the call, whether the called function always reverts or always successfully terminates. However, in the case that the control flow conditionally can continue after the call to a function, but the function call may also terminate using the ``return(...)`` or ``stop()`` statements (see examples below), the optimizer incorrectly still behaved, as if the control flow *always* continued after the function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a function call is performed between (1) and (3), the optimizer has to consider the control flow behaviour of the function call, e.g. whether control flow may continue beyond the call, whether the called function always reverts or always successfully terminates. However, in the case that the control flow conditionally can continue after the call to a function, but the function call may also terminate using the ``return(...)`` or ``stop()`` statements (see examples below), the optimizer incorrectly still behaved as if the control flow *always* continued after the function.
```
